---
tag: science
title: The Stanford medical experiment
image: /standford.jpeg
imageAlt: stanford medical experiment
date: 2021-01-22T01:58:54.354Z
description: The Stanford prison experiment conducted by Stanford University
  psychology professor Philip Zimbardo included 18 participants,all-male, who
  had responded to a classified ad in a newspaper that was in quest of people
  that were willing to participate in a 2 weeks long prison psychology
  experiment with a generous daily wedge.
author: Unknown
authorPic: /standford.jpeg
---
The Stanford prison experiment conducted by Stanford University psychology professor Philip Zimbardo included 18 participants,all-male, who had responded to a classified ad in a newspaper that was in quest of people that were willing to participate in a 2 weeks long prison psychology experiment with a generous daily wedge. The participants were randomly classified into two groups 9 "prisoners" and 9 "guards " besides the "guards" there was a prison "staff" which consisted of professor Philip Zimbardo and his students. For the experiment professor, Philip Zimbardo built a three-cell mock “Stanford County Jail” in the basement of the university’s psychology building. Experiment planned to measure the effect of role-playing, labeling, and social expectations on behavior over a period of two weeks.\
late in the evening of August 16th, 1971 a mere 36 hours after the beginning of the experiment, twenty-two-year-old Douglas Korpi, a slim, short-statured Berkeley graduate with a mop of pale, shaggy hair, was locked in a dark closet in the basement of the Stanford psychology department, naked beneath a thin white smock bearing the number 8612, screaming his head off and his reaction was caught on audiotape. The experiment lasted a total of six days in lieu of 2 weeks after Zimbardo’s girlfriend(now his wife of many years) convinced him to shut down the prison and stop the experiment. Since then tales of the "guards" sadistic behavior and the "prisoners" break down spread like wildfire.\
For almost half a decade the experiment has piqued the interest of many. It was a physiological experiment that used to teach that our behavior is shaped by the roles we play in society. But its darker and more disturbing implication was that we all have a dormant evil inside of us waiting to be awakened by circumstances and in the right condition anyone can be submissive.\
Except the experiment wasn't quite accurate. Korpi now says his episode was less a psychotic break than a manipulation so he could go home and study.“Anybody who is a clinician would know that I was faking,” he told author Ben Blum in a rare interview, part of a lengthy feature in the online publication Medium. Now a forensic psychologist in Oakland, Korpi characterized his outburst as “more hysterical than psychotic.”Actually, he yelled not because of abusive guards but because he was worried about not getting access to textbooks during his “prison” stay so he could cram for the Graduate Record Examination. Korpi said he took the $15-per-day job as a prisoner because he thought he’d have time “to sit around by myself and study for my GREs.”\
Additionally, In a 2011 interview published in the Stanford alumni magazine, Dave Eshelman, a Stanford “guard” who earned the nickname John Wayne for his imaginative cruelty said, “I set out with a definite plan in mind, to try to force the action, force something to happen so that the researchers would have something to work with. After all, what could they possibly learn from guys sitting around like it was a country club?”\
Furthermore, While Zimbardo recounts the tale of what happened beginning from Sunday, August,15,1971 and makes it sound like the "guards" behavior was their natural inclination a more factual telling begins the day before when Zimbardo called on the "guards" and gave them an orientation instructing them on how to act. “We cannot physically abuse or torture them,” Zimbardo told them, in recordings first released a decade and a half after the experiment. “We can create boredom. We can create a sense of frustration. We can create fear in them, to some degree… We have total power in the situation. They have none.”\
Much of the meeting was conducted by David Jaffe, the undergraduate student serving as “Warden,” whose foundational contribution to the experiment Zimbardo has long underplayed. Jaffe and a few fellow students had actually cooked up the idea of a simulated prison themselves three months earlier, in response to an open-ended assignment in an undergraduate class taught by Zimbardo. Zimbardo was quite fascinated by Jaffe’s two-day simulation and thus he decided to try it himself, this time randomly assigning guards and prisoners and dragging the action on much longer. Because Zimbardo himself had never visited a real prison, the standards of realism were defined by Jaffe’s prison research and the nightmarish recollections of Carlo Prescott, a San Quentin parolee whom Zimbardo met through Jaffe and brought in as a consultant. Jaffe wrote in a post-experiment evaluation. “I was asked to suggest tactics based on my previous experience as a master sadist. … I was given the responsibility of trying to elicit ‘tough-guard’ behavior.”\
And lastly, the means with which participants were recruited is also questionable in 2007, Western Kentucky University psychologists Thomas Carnahan and Sam McFarland placed ads in several university newspapers, offering to pay volunteers for a “psychological study of prison life,” as Zimbardo’s ad had in 1971. They also invited another group to participate simply in a “psychological study,” without any mention of prison life. Then they tested the respondents and found that those who replied to the “prison life” ad scored higher on measures of authoritarianism, narcissism, Machiavellianism, social dominance, and “abuse-related dispositions of aggressiveness.” They also scored lower on measures of empathy and altruism, suggesting that the Stanford subjects may have shown up in August 1971 with traits of cruelty that not all of us necessarily possess.