---
tag: WORLD POLITICS
title: What is happening in the Ethio-Sudanese border?
image: /img_20210123_143702_991.jpg
imageAlt: Ethio-Sudanese border
date: 2021-01-05T11:34:00.000Z
description: What's currently happening in the Ethio-Sudanese border? What's it's cause?
author: Betelhem Weldekidan
authorPic: /img_20210123_143702_991.jpg
---
What's happening in the Ethio-Sudanese border? 
The border dispute between Ethiopia and Sudan is a decades long issue.  Even though the international boundary runs east (marking the region as Sudan's and subsequently raising questions from historians.  ) Ethiopian farmers had been living there for years.  The disputed territory, Al-Fashaqa(where the north west of Amhara meets Sudan's gedaref state) has no clear demarcation line on the ground.  In 2008 the two governments reached an agreement. Sudan allowed Ethiopian Farmers to continue living there with no military disturbances as long as Ethiopia acknowledges the legal boundary. But Ethiopian activists mention a secret deal was made between the former Ethiopian government to compromise the Ethiopian land. 
 Recently tensions around the border have escalated following the tigray conflict.  There have been signs of armed clashes around the agricultural land al-fashaqa. The Sudanese transitional authorities had demanded the eviction of the farmers a while ago. As a result PM Abiy Ahmed sent General Adam Mohamed Mahmoud, the military chief, to Khartoum. The negotiation was in vain and a second Khartoum visit from Ethiopia was on the way. Sudan deployed its troops along the al-fashaqa border at the end of march. Sudan's Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Al-buran defended the act mentioning that they had no choice but to protect their land. This comes after an alleged attack from Ethiopian millita. Ethiopian officials have so far denied the allegations.  Ethiopian Foreign minister spokesman,   Dina Mufti, recently held a briefing and he stated that "outside forces" were responsible for the unrest. He also accused said outside forces of flaring up tensions,  and wanting chaos around the region. A lot presumed Egypt as the outside force the minister was referring to. The spokesman also  told the press that sudan had gone way beyond the ethiopian border lines by sending troops as far as west Gondar  and  attacking civillians. He warned of retaliatory actions against the Sudanese army  to protect the sovereignty of Ethiopia.  The Sudanese army also gave a briefing claiming that they now had full control over the disputed region. "We can take back what is left of our land. We reached borders. The land that we lost 20 years ago is under complete control, we can take the others in other ways, " the Lieutenant General Al-Shami said.  After the statements a  number of Sudanese went to the streets to celebrate the "regaining" of the land.  
International peace advocates are now calling on both leaders to resume peace talks,  and pursue deplomacy to resolve the border dispute.  It is clear that the border dispute, if ignored, could lead to serious escalations.  Even though Ethiopia analyst Davidson argues that the border dispute has little to do with GERD, different political analysts have noted on how the dispute could further complicate the GERD negotiations.  Especially,  after Sudan wrote to the UN security council calling on it to urge Ethiopia and Egypt,  not to take unilateral actions on the dam, DW writes.  Several african analysts  have also voiced their skepticism towards another foreign intervening force - the US. Now that Sudan Is off the list of "a state sponsor of terrorism", the relation between Sudan and the US. remains unclear. That's why many expect Sudan and Ethiopia to solve the dispute with out relying on foreign mediation, taking into account the warm diplomatical relations and cultural values the two countries share.  The Sudanese prime minister Abdella Hamdock indicated his will to end the conflict with negotiations,  but it is clear that the Lieutenant General and several others perfer forceful Confrontations. It is also noted that the General has strong ties with Egypt.  But what was the immediate triggering cause of this old-age border dispute? The question remains unanswered and both sides have different stories to tell. With Sudan's Darfur peace deal still incomplete and unrest in parts of Ethiopia, each country could readily return to "a pattern of mutual destabilisation, " Alex de Waal predicts.  The world is surely taking a close look at the dispute between the countries, but both Ethiopians and the Sudanese expect their leaders to come to a mutual understanding,  and put an end to the long-standing conflict. 